Hello.
NOTE CONF
Hello, hello.
Oh, hello.
NOTE CONF
Oh, it is working.
Okay, can you come in and sit down, please?
NOTE CONF
Lecture's starting right now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so please sit down and, uh, we're starting off
with a, uh, with a couple of minutes on inf
NOTE CONF
pals, um, from Paulina and Vicky.
Okay, so go ahead.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Hi, everyone.
So we're here to quickly tell you about impulse.
NOTE CONF
It's a peer support service run by super qualified undergraduate
students.
NOTE CONF
and we help you out with info and a bunch
of cool extracurricular skills.
NOTE CONF
We run three days a week in Appleton Tower.
You can come whenever you like.
NOTE CONF
There's no signup required, so just scan the website to
see in detail which sessions we'll be doing.
NOTE CONF
And there's no signup required either.
Um, we are offering support specifically for infant A this
NOTE CONF
semester.
Um, so come along to practice and gain more confidence.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the things you've been learning in the previous
week.
NOTE CONF
And we also run, um, skill sessions each week.
Uh, and more next semester, specifically on things that which
NOTE CONF
are really useful, um, for your university career, which we
thought we weren't really taught.
NOTE CONF
Um, so things like git for you to download your
assignments later on, which isn't really explained or command line
NOTE CONF
to do some of your assignments in, uh, LaTeX, which
you might be required to write up some of your
NOTE CONF
assignments.
Um, and we also running this year portfolio website course.
NOTE CONF
So if you've ever wanted to build your own website
and showcase all your achievements and your projects.
NOTE CONF
That's a really good thing to come along to.
Yeah, that's about it.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so much for listening.
Please scan the QR code and come along.
NOTE CONF
We're starting next week Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday.
Come to any of them.
NOTE CONF
There's free snacks and hope to see you there.
Did you say what Paul stands for?
NOTE CONF
Oh, and Paul stands for peer assisted learning support.
We're run by USAA as well as the School of
NOTE CONF
Informatics, so we're really well supported.
Come along.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so much.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So, uh.
Starting off with, uh, ride of the Valkyries by Richard
NOTE CONF
Wagner.
And I wish this could be louder because it really
NOTE CONF
only works if it's deafening.
Okay, I'll stop there.
NOTE CONF
The, um.
This is not really working very well.
NOTE CONF
It's not.
It's not loud enough.
NOTE CONF
Um, I don't know how I can get that to
be better.
NOTE CONF
My previous lecture theatre, it was much better.
Okay, so today I'm going to be talking about more
NOTE CONF
about lists and about recursion.
Um, so this week you've got you've had a lecture
NOTE CONF
on Monday about a list comprehension.
And I'm doing Friday as well.
NOTE CONF
Today we're out of order because I was travelling this
week.
NOTE CONF
So um, so another way to do things with lists
is using recursion.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I told you about this comprehension.
I explained this is kind of woosh style programming Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, recursion is the functional programming way of doing
a kind of, um, element at a time.
NOTE CONF
Um, programming, it's it is the closest thing you have
to loops in conventional programming languages.
NOTE CONF
If then else while loops and that sort of thing.
Um, some things can't be written using comprehension.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see an example of that later on in
the lecture.
NOTE CONF
But with recursion you can do anything.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And when I say you can do anything that's actually
a theorem.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, you can prove.
So um, you might have heard of Turing machines.
NOTE CONF
It's a kind of mathematical model of computation.
Um, and the idea is that if you can compute
NOTE CONF
something with a Turing machine, that's what it means for
something to be computable.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's a very simple model of competition with little, little
NOTE CONF
tiny steps and, um, uh, but you can compute You
can compute anything that you can compute with a with
NOTE CONF
a big computer, okay.
It's the same, same same power.
NOTE CONF
And there is a theorem which says that recursive defined
ability is equivalent to Turing computability.
NOTE CONF
So you can prove mathematically that anything you can compute
with the Turing machine, you can uh define with the
NOTE CONF
recursive function and vice versa.
So they're equivalent.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is uh, the church.
Church Turing thesis is the name of this, um, of
NOTE CONF
this theorem.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, before I get to recursion, I need to say
a little bit more about, um, what's going on here?
NOTE CONF
Why did my screen go blank?
That's interesting.
NOTE CONF
Okay, where are the rest of my slides?
Uh huh.
NOTE CONF
Just a second.
Oh, there they are.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
Hmm.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's a new.
NOTE CONF
That's a new, um, bug that I haven't seen before.
Oh, great.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, luckily, I have a laptop with me which has
NOTE CONF
the same stuff on it.
Uh, give me a second and I will find it.
NOTE CONF
You may have read there some sort of big computing
outage this week or today.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it looks like it's just started affecting the,
uh, that machine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Carrying on.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so before we get to recursion, I need to
explain a little bit more about lists.
NOTE CONF
You've heard about lists last time.
Um, so I've explained already there's an operation called cons,
NOTE CONF
uh, written with a colon.
With this type, it takes an element and a list
NOTE CONF
puts an element onto the front of a list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The element has to be the same type as the
things in the list.
NOTE CONF
Everything in the list has to be the same type.
And so you use cons like in this example here
NOTE CONF
to put a one on the front of a list
containing two and three, you get a list containing all
NOTE CONF
three.
Very exciting.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes.
Um, uh, so there's another operation that you will encounter
NOTE CONF
and it's pronounced append.
And it's written with two pluses also as an as
NOTE CONF
an infix operation okay.
In between the two arguments okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's for taking two lists of the same type
and putting them together end to end.
NOTE CONF
So you've got list one here appended to list here.
And it just joins them in the middle.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so I mentioned this at this point just because
NOTE CONF
uh, these are kind of similar but different okay.
The types are different.
NOTE CONF
So cons takes an element and a list and produces
a list.
NOTE CONF
Append takes two lists produces a list.
They both put things together okay.
NOTE CONF
End to end.
Here's examples of the use of append.
NOTE CONF
So there's there's cons.
The first one.
NOTE CONF
These are all uses of append.
If you try to use them in the wrong way
NOTE CONF
you get a typeerror.
If you try to use cons to put an element
NOTE CONF
on the wrong end of a list.
It's type error if you use cons to put in
NOTE CONF
to put a list on the front of another list,
that's a type error.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you use append to put an element, a
single element which isn't a list on the front of
NOTE CONF
a list, that's a type error, and so forth.
These are all type errors.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these functions are easy to confuse.
NOTE CONF
They're different.
Um, the the differences in the types okay.
NOTE CONF
Types are important.
So Haskell is kind of annoying.
NOTE CONF
You might think you might have already encountered type errors.
Probably have.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, you it insists on the types being correct.
NOTE CONF
Um, if the types are not correct, it refuses to
do anything.
NOTE CONF
It just says types are wrong.
Go away and fix them.
NOTE CONF
Okay, now this is annoying, so why can't I just
say what I want?
NOTE CONF
And Haskell is.
Which should be so clever that it will figure out
NOTE CONF
what I mean and do the right thing.
Okay, Well, um.
NOTE CONF
That's possible.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, the problem is, you know, in these days of
of of AI and ChatGPT and so forth, it's, uh,
NOTE CONF
it's even easier than it used to be.
But, um, anyway, the thing with this is that if
NOTE CONF
the if the computer guesses what I mean, okay, maybe
it'll get it right 90% of the time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that's, that's very helpful.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But the other 10% of the time, um, it's going
NOTE CONF
to be a real problem because, uh, uh, a mistake.
That's a mistake in what the computer has guessed you.
NOTE CONF
It thinks you mean.
Imagine trying to track down a bug like that.
NOTE CONF
So what you wrote, and then the computer guesses what
you meant, and then it doesn't work, and you have
NOTE CONF
to figure out what the computer was guessing and so
forth.
NOTE CONF
It's really hard to track these kind of things down
to get.
NOTE CONF
It's better to just get it right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And another reason, if you get it right, then what
you've written is what the computer is doing.
NOTE CONF
If it's not right, you can see what you wrote.
You can see, you can figure out what it's doing.
NOTE CONF
You can figure out why it's wrong.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, but often also a type error is a sign
of a deeper mistake in your thinking.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, not just that you use the wrong operation here,
NOTE CONF
but in some more complicated program, you get a type
error.
NOTE CONF
Often it means you didn't quite understand what you were
doing.
NOTE CONF
And when you get a type error, you realise, oh,
I forgot some case that I didn't think of before.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it's like a, not a not a typo,
but a think.
NOTE CONF
Oh, all right.
It exposes your thing goes.
NOTE CONF
And there's a, there's a kind of, um, claim in
functional programming and, and these programming languages with these strong
NOTE CONF
type systems that if you get the types right, then
most of the time the program will be right.
NOTE CONF
And that's not 100% true, but it's it's actually pretty,
uh, pretty close.
NOTE CONF
It's, um, it's pretty accurate that the types are a
lot of the story.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so get them right and your life will be,
NOTE CONF
uh, much better.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now lists.
So cons is is special.
NOTE CONF
And the reason it's special is, is because of is
because of this property.
NOTE CONF
So every list can be written using only this cons
operation and the empty list.
NOTE CONF
The empty list is usually called not.
It's called nil okay.
NOTE CONF
This brackets square brackets with nothing inside the empty list.
Nil okay.
NOTE CONF
Every list can be written using only these two things.
And here is an example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, this list can be written.
NOTE CONF
Uh, of course you need the elements of the list,
but then the operations are cons and nil and this,
NOTE CONF
um, list of characters or string can be written um,
again using cons and nil.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of obvious if the pattern that you're using
there is kind of obvious.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Anyway, this is a, this is a property.
NOTE CONF
And not only that, but it can be written.
Every list can be written only one way using cons
NOTE CONF
and nil.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So there is no other way to write this list
one two, three using cons and nil other than what
NOTE CONF
I've written down here okay.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's because.
And so we can use that to define what a
NOTE CONF
list is.
So a list a list is a is a thing
NOTE CONF
that I can build using cons and nil okay.
So uh there's the case where there's a there's a
NOTE CONF
nil and no cons is that we call the empty
list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Written like that.
NOTE CONF
nil, or what we can call a constructed list written
using cons, where the head is an element, let's call
NOTE CONF
it x and the tail, let's call it x.
Is is a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh cons x xz.
NOTE CONF
All right.
I'll have something to say about this definition in a
NOTE CONF
second.
This is called a recursive definition because it, um, it
NOTE CONF
defines a list.
So this is the the property of being a list.
NOTE CONF
So what is a list.
It's defining that recursively meaning that it defines a list
NOTE CONF
in terms of lists.
So it uses the thing it's defining in the definition.
NOTE CONF
And I'll come back to that in a second okay.
But for now let me just say the fact that
NOTE CONF
every list can be written only one way using these
two operations means that we can use this, as.
NOTE CONF
This is why we can use pattern matching to define
things.
NOTE CONF
So every lists, every list matches exactly one of these
two patterns.
NOTE CONF
It's either empty or it's it's a head x.
Uh, cons uh, the tail XS.
NOTE CONF
This will match only non-empty lists okay.
And if we're presented with a non-empty list we know
NOTE CONF
what x is.
And we know what x is, is because there's only
NOTE CONF
one way of writing the list using cons.
And so x is the thing before the cons and
NOTE CONF
x is the thing x is is the thing after
the cons.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so that's the this fact, the way that we
NOTE CONF
define lists.
Uh, which leads to this, um, this property is where
NOTE CONF
we get pattern matching from, of course, the names of
the variables don't matter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so, for example, um, you know, if I have
NOTE CONF
a function definition, last time I showed you, um, definition
of head and tail, I think.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so that says head.
NOTE CONF
And then there's a pattern.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I apply that to a list.
Whatever it is, uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That is just notation for.
NOTE CONF
For this And then there's some other stuff here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um.
And we know that.
NOTE CONF
So this this is in order to evaluate that, we
need to match this against the pattern x cons xs.
NOTE CONF
And we know that x is one and x is
is the rest okay.
NOTE CONF
So all unambiguous straightforward.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, I take the trouble of explaining that in a
little bit of detail because although now it's all well,
NOTE CONF
I hope it looks easy.
Um, later on things get a little bit more, uh,
NOTE CONF
complicated.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so these are patterns, and I'll just, I'll just
say there's there's more notation for patterns.
NOTE CONF
You can you can have things like, um, so here's
suppose we have a list with five elements like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We've got, we've got uh, this pattern.
NOTE CONF
Ex-cons XS.
Oh, I'm not showing you anything.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
The problem is, the desktop is not working.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Please shout if I do that again.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here's a list and we can, we can
define, uh, values of variables by matching against the list.
NOTE CONF
So I can say in Haskell, ex-cons XS equals my
list.
NOTE CONF
And here here's an example down here okay.
Um, so x will be zero because it's the first
NOTE CONF
thing.
And x's will be the list containing everything else.
NOTE CONF
I can also use patterns which are which have this
kind of form.
NOTE CONF
They look like lists but with variables in them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This will match a list of length five as it
does down here.
NOTE CONF
Okay A is equal to zero, B is equal to
one, c is equal to two, and so forth as
NOTE CONF
we see.
Um, but if I try to match something of the
NOTE CONF
wrong length, I'll get an error message.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And tells me that the it's an exception which says
something about the lengths of the list being wrong.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, anyway, that's useful to know.
NOTE CONF
Um, you're going to be using pattern matching a lot,
but let me get back to lists and recursion.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is the definition of lists that I gave you
NOTE CONF
a minute ago.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so list is either empty or it's constructed with
a head x and a tail x.
NOTE CONF
So this definition as I said, it's recursive.
It it defines lists.
NOTE CONF
But I'm using lists in the definition okay.
And so a first reaction to this might be you
NOTE CONF
can't do that okay.
If I'm trying to explain something it's no good for
NOTE CONF
me to explain it.
Assuming that you already know what it is.
NOTE CONF
right?
So why is this okay?
NOTE CONF
This is actually okay.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's okay because I've.
I've done it carefully, uh, in the right way.
NOTE CONF
It's a so-called well-founded definition.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the reason it's okay is because I'm defining, uh,
complex lists that, um, well, okay, the first case is
NOTE CONF
the first case.
I don't think anybody has a problem with that empty
NOTE CONF
list.
Right.
NOTE CONF
It's the second case.
So I'm I'm explaining a complicated list x cons xz
NOTE CONF
with reference to a simple list or simpler list XS
okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's something that's smaller than x cons xs okay,
so I'm explaining a more complicated thing in terms of
NOTE CONF
a simpler thing okay.
They're both they're both lists okay.
NOTE CONF
But I'm explaining a complicated list in terms of simpler
list, and ultimately in terms of the simplest list of
NOTE CONF
all, which is the empty list.
Okay, so every list I can check it against.
NOTE CONF
We just go back.
I can check it.
NOTE CONF
You know, something like this.
I can check it against that definition.
NOTE CONF
Here's the definition again.
And I can check.
NOTE CONF
Is that a list?
And I can say, well, um, you know, according to
NOTE CONF
the second clause of that, uh, it's a list provided
that, you know, one is an element.
NOTE CONF
And this thing here is a list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, I can check whether this is a list because
this is an element and this thing is a list.
NOTE CONF
And I can check whether that's a list by checking
that that's an element.
NOTE CONF
And this empty list is a list.
And I know that that's a list because that's the
NOTE CONF
first case again okay I did that quickly.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But reference with reference to the definition Using using each
of the, uh, the cases.
NOTE CONF
Um, the second one repeatedly.
Because lists might be long.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can you can work out that any list is
NOTE CONF
indeed a list with reference to that definition.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this is a typical example of recursive definition
of a of a type.
NOTE CONF
We're going to see in a minute recursive definition of
a function okay.
NOTE CONF
But that's the idea you define.
You define something uh, by explaining the more complicated case
NOTE CONF
in terms of the simpler case.
And then, you know, uh, it sort of just goes
NOTE CONF
along complicated case in terms of simpler case in terms
of even simpler case, eventually down to the simplest case
NOTE CONF
of all.
And the whole thing works.
NOTE CONF
And I'll show you how that, how that computes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is this is, as I said, it's called a
well-founded definition because it's defining a, uh.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's a it's a use of recursion where
you're not just defining something in terms of itself, you're
NOTE CONF
defining something in terms of a simpler example, a simpler
version of itself.
NOTE CONF
And this is in contrast.
So we had this some we've, we've been having this
NOTE CONF
um, Brexit kind of thing for, for many years in
the U.K. it's kind of been a, a nightmare, um,
NOTE CONF
politically and so forth.
And, and the first prime minister after the Brexit referendum
NOTE CONF
was Theresa may.
And people were trying to work out what is what
NOTE CONF
do we mean by this thing that we've just decided
to do?
NOTE CONF
And her explanation was Brexit means Brexit.
And this is an example of a non well-founded recursive
NOTE CONF
definition okay.
Which means it doesn't actually mean anything.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
So this is not what we're doing in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, whatever you think of Brexit, this is not
an explanation of anything.
NOTE CONF
I think what she meant is it's obvious I don't
have to explain it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Was what she was trying to say.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Any questions so far?
NOTE CONF
I haven't explained enough to have much.
Does everybody understand recursion?
NOTE CONF
Maybe I don't have to explain anymore.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No.
Well.
NOTE CONF
We'll see.
Um, I think I'll skip this.
NOTE CONF
This is a bunch of functions on numbers, so we've
already seen head and tail, and there's a function called
NOTE CONF
null as well.
Null is a is a test of a list to
NOTE CONF
tell you if it's empty or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So null applied to that list will say false and
null applied to um this list will say true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Not very exciting.
NOTE CONF
Now let's see our first example of a recursive function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is using recursion to define functions.
And I'll start off by showing you a function you've
NOTE CONF
already seen.
It's the the function that squares every element in the
NOTE CONF
list.
And you defined it.
NOTE CONF
We defined it on Friday on Monday using our list
comprehension.
NOTE CONF
So here was the definition up here okay.
Um it's the squares of x's.
NOTE CONF
Is the list consisting of x times x uh such
that x is drawn from x's okay.
NOTE CONF
And so we take a list x x is we
take every element of the list.
NOTE CONF
We compute the square.
We put them all together into a list.
NOTE CONF
End of story.
That's that's computing the squares of a list of of
NOTE CONF
of integers okay.
Type is uh list of int arrow.
NOTE CONF
List of int.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, we can do the same thing.
We're using recursion.
NOTE CONF
And the the definition using recursion looks like this I'm
going to call it squares rec.
NOTE CONF
Not because I need to call recursive functions things ending
with the word rec, but because I'm defining two functions
NOTE CONF
here and I can't use the same name.
Okay, so uh, I'll use that name.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is a recursive definition.
NOTE CONF
You can see because the function I'm defining squares rec
also occurs on the right hand side of the definition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's what recursion means.
NOTE CONF
And um, as is usual with recursive definitions, there are
there's more than one case.
NOTE CONF
And um, there's more than one case because there are
two kinds of lists.
NOTE CONF
So we need a case for each of the kinds
of lists there is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's the empty list and there's the non-empty list.
NOTE CONF
So we have a case for the empty list.
And we have a case for the non-empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the squares.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
The squares of a list containing nothing.
NOTE CONF
That's easy.
It's the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that that line I think should be obvious.
This is this is in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
You can write function definitions by writing a sequence of
equations.
NOTE CONF
I didn't say that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Everything we've seen up to now has just been one
equation.
NOTE CONF
You can also do it by having cases okay.
So this is the empty case and this is the
NOTE CONF
non-empty case.
So in the non-empty case you've got a list containing
NOTE CONF
x cons x's.
And how do you get the square of all the
NOTE CONF
elements in that list.
Well you square the first element.
NOTE CONF
There it is.
And then you, uh, attach that to the front of
NOTE CONF
the result of squaring all the other elements in the
list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
If you haven't seen this before, you might again have
this problem and saying, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that doesn't explain anything.
Uh, I've just explained squares wreck in terms of itself.
NOTE CONF
I'm kind of assuming on the right hand side that
you know what this does in explaining what this thing
NOTE CONF
over here does.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why is that?
Why is that okay?
NOTE CONF
You have a question.
Shall I throw this?
NOTE CONF
I hope this is turned on.
Is this working?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh, it was up there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, in front of squares.
NOTE CONF
Rec ex-cons access.
It's it splits the list into, um, current tiles.
NOTE CONF
What does it does in the beginning?
Um, There.
NOTE CONF
So x and x is those are just, uh, variable
names.
NOTE CONF
So you could call them head and tail.
Is that.
NOTE CONF
Does that answer your question?
Um, I.
NOTE CONF
Guess I'm trying to say y is the syntax is
like this.
NOTE CONF
Why we writing it down like this?
Um, every single time we're going to approach something similar
NOTE CONF
in recursion, we're going to define lists.
That's going to substitute for specific case in this format.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That's going to be.
NOTE CONF
Always it's going to happen a lot.
Yeah okay.
NOTE CONF
And there's other there's other examples of recursion that you'll
come across later okay.
NOTE CONF
Does that help.
Yeah okay.
NOTE CONF
There's another student here.
But uh yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I understand this case works because the two cases
are disjoint.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So, uh, Haskell recognises.
NOTE CONF
Oh, it's either the case of an empty list or
the case of a non-empty list.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So, but what happens when the two cases are not
NOTE CONF
disjoint?
They share a case in common.
NOTE CONF
How does Haskell know?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
What do you mean?
NOTE CONF
Good question.
Okay, the answer is it does them one at a
NOTE CONF
time.
And the first one that matches it, it does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's possible to write non-overlapping cases.
NOTE CONF
Are there other questions right now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So you can have more than two cases.
NOTE CONF
And it's possible that they won't uh sometimes they don't
overlap.
NOTE CONF
They are not disjoint.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's good when they are disjoint because then everything is
very clear okay.
NOTE CONF
But in case they're not disjoint, Haskell, uh, goes one
at a time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So carry on here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let me see.
Uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
I was just explaining, uh, you might complain about this.
You might say I'm defining squares rec in terms of
NOTE CONF
square rec.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But again, this is a well founded definition.
I'm explaining squares rec of x convex in terms of
NOTE CONF
squares rec of x and x is is simpler than
x.
NOTE CONF
Cons ends xs.
It's simpler because it's like a sub a sub part
NOTE CONF
of it okay it's smaller okay.
If x cons x has n elements, then x has
NOTE CONF
n minus one elements.
And eventually repeating this you get to zero elements and
NOTE CONF
zero elements.
Is the is the empty list okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
I'll just quickly say that if you have trouble with
NOTE CONF
pattern matching, uh, these two programs are equivalent.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the only difference is that this one, instead
of using pattern matching, it does, um, it does case
NOTE CONF
analysis and deconstruction of values using head and tail instead
of using pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so if you have trouble with pattern matching this
is equivalent.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think this is a very nice, elegant, simple
way to write this rather verbose, complicated thing.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this, however, might be more familiar to you, um,
from other programming languages.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, I just I'll just briefly say that and
get on to recursion.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
So how does this work?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And it's useful to look at an example and step
by step see what's going on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so I'm going to do a little computation of
NOTE CONF
this.
Some of this of this value of squares rec apply
NOTE CONF
to list containing 1 to 3.
We know what the answer is going to be.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be list containing 149.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But how does this how does this come out of
this definition?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, uh, first of all, we can expand this
NOTE CONF
notation.
This is just this is just notation for this list
NOTE CONF
built using cons and nil.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then we can do pattern matching.
So if we look sorry go back.
NOTE CONF
We look at the two the two cases here we
try to figure out which one of these is going
NOTE CONF
to is going to match.
Well it's not the first one because the list is
NOTE CONF
not empty.
So it's got to be the second one.
NOTE CONF
And the pattern is x cons xz.
So uh x is one and x is is everything
NOTE CONF
after one.
So it's this list containing two and three okay.
NOTE CONF
So I've made a note of that here.
And then I look at the right hand side of
NOTE CONF
of that equation.
So you know this thing is equal to that thing.
NOTE CONF
So I have this thing.
So what?
NOTE CONF
What what is that thing?
Given that x is one and x is, is this
NOTE CONF
list containing two and three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well it's this it's this expression.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So all I've done is written out the right hand
side of that definition of the second line of that
NOTE CONF
definition, substituting one for x and two cons three cons
nil for xs okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear?
Important here is these are entirely mechanical steps.
NOTE CONF
Computer is not being clever.
It's just what.
NOTE CONF
It's just doing what you told it okay.
The next step okay.
NOTE CONF
Again I should have maybe gone slower.
But.
NOTE CONF
But squares rec squares rec here I have to compute
what that is.
NOTE CONF
And again I can use a second the second equation
here and expand it in just the same sort of
NOTE CONF
way okay.
So one times one is still there, but now I've
NOTE CONF
got a expanded version of what Square's rec of this
some of this list means.
NOTE CONF
Okay, X is now two, X is is now the
list containing three and nothing else.
NOTE CONF
And so this expands using the second equation to this
expression okay two times two cons squares rec of x
NOTE CONF
is x is three cons nil okay.
And then one more step we get this okay.
NOTE CONF
Now x is three x's is the empty list.
And now finally we've got Square's Rec over the empty
NOTE CONF
list here.
And we can apply the first equation to say that
NOTE CONF
that's equal to the empty list.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So this has been a sequence of steps that's turned
this function definition.
NOTE CONF
Function application into this, uh, into this expression which contains
only multiplication and cons okay.
NOTE CONF
So we can do the multiplications and and then use
the notation for lists to see that that's the list
NOTE CONF
that we thought it should be.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I went through that a little bit quickly.
But step by step okay.
NOTE CONF
So um you have to be able to I mean
this is a way to understand this.
NOTE CONF
If you find it difficult, do it yourself.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Slowly.
Make sure you understand the steps.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is what the computer is doing.
NOTE CONF
It's all very it's actually very simple.
This is, um, you know, step by step, replacing expressions
NOTE CONF
with other expressions that you said are equal to them.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Equal means you can replace it by the other one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, in in using equations for computing, we regard them
as left to right, uh, rewrite rules.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can replace the thing on the left by the
NOTE CONF
thing on the right, maintaining the values of the variables
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
As usual.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is this is a way to understand recursion.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm just looking to see what time it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Um, now if you, um, this is an example of
NOTE CONF
using QuickCheck again.
Uh, you've, I've shown you before using QuickCheck, this is
NOTE CONF
using QuickCheck to make sure that two versions of the
same function are okay.
NOTE CONF
So I've claimed that these two definitions give the same
result, and I can use QuickCheck to check that.
NOTE CONF
So I can have a program or a little function
here, which takes a list of integers and checks that
NOTE CONF
for that, for that, for a given list of integers
that.
NOTE CONF
Applying squares to xz, which is this sum uh, version
of squares using list comprehension that it produces the same
NOTE CONF
answer as this recursive definition.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so prop squares is, is is what that, um,
function called.
NOTE CONF
It's, it's a, it's a test function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if I, if I, um, if I, um, run
Haskell and run QuickCheck, it'll tell me.
NOTE CONF
Yes, it works for 100 tests.
Let me, um, I think I have time to show
NOTE CONF
you this.
Um, and what's interesting is what happens if it if
NOTE CONF
it's, um.
If I made a mistake.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can you all read that?
I hope you can.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the program that I just had on the
screen is, is in the top bit here.
NOTE CONF
And I've also added squares cond, which is this version
using um, conditional and and so forth to do the
NOTE CONF
instead of pattern matching.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And my and my prop squares also checks to see
that that that is equivalent.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I can I can now do a quick check
NOTE CONF
in the bottom okay.
The way I've got this set up, the top part
NOTE CONF
is the program.
The bottom part is Haskell running.
NOTE CONF
I've just compiled it and I can do a quick
check of prop squares.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it'll say yes, it's right.
Okay, so you believe me now?
NOTE CONF
What if I made a mistake?
So go back to my program, and I've Accidentally.
NOTE CONF
Uh, in the in the second, in the second, uh,
clause of uh, of the recursion I've put in x
NOTE CONF
times x times x by mistake.
So it's cubing.
NOTE CONF
Okay, um, wait a minute.
I've got a oh, come on.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, uh, squares rec apply to one, two, three
will be, um, one eight and 27.
NOTE CONF
That's wrong.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and quick check will quickly discover that, um, it's
called uh, what's it called again?
NOTE CONF
Prop squares.
Okay, I try, I try to, uh, to get it
NOTE CONF
to check whether squares delivers the same result as squares
rec and whether squares deliver the same result as squares.
NOTE CONF
Cons.
And um, and it says no.
NOTE CONF
And here's an example where, where it doesn't work.
So for example, um, the list containing just two, which
NOTE CONF
is obvious because, um, you know, squares, rec squares of
that list is that n squares of squares rec of
NOTE CONF
that list is eight.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you make a mistake.
Um, quick check.
NOTE CONF
Uh, will, uh, be helpful sometimes in finding out, uh,
that it was a mistake.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
For that reason, we're kind of, uh, encouraging you to,
NOTE CONF
um, to use it and to pay attention to the
results that it gives.
NOTE CONF
Just putting that back the way it is.
So I'll be able to use it in the future.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So back to my slides.
NOTE CONF
Um, everybody okay.
So far?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, here's another example.
A little bit different.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is uh, uh, selecting the odd elements.
NOTE CONF
Well, this this is an example that I had in
my other lecture, my previous lecture.
NOTE CONF
And here was the example that I had in the
previous lecture.
NOTE CONF
This is uh, a function definition using using a guard
comprehension list comprehension with a guard.
NOTE CONF
So if you recall, this was, uh, taking a list
of numbers and filtering out all of the odd numbers
NOTE CONF
from the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we take a list like one, two, three, we
apply this and we get one and three because two
NOTE CONF
is not odd okay.
And here is a recursive definition of the same function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um same type.
NOTE CONF
I'm calling it ODS req to distinguish it from ODS.
Okay, same first line of the definition.
NOTE CONF
Almost always the first line of a recursive function definition
on on on lists will be of that form, but
NOTE CONF
not always.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it'll always be, you know, function applied to empty
list equals something.
NOTE CONF
Usually there's something is going to be the empty list,
but not always.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, um, so, um, okay, but what if it's
not empty?
NOTE CONF
What if the list is not empty?
So the list is contains a head x and a
NOTE CONF
tail XS.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well then there's two cases.
And this is how you do a case analysis in
NOTE CONF
Haskell.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So odds rec of x cons x is such that
uh ord of x is true Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's like it's like what we did here.
We have this guard out of X's out of X.
NOTE CONF
And here it is.
It's a it's a guard on the on this definition
NOTE CONF
on this on this equation okay.
If x is odd then the result is we include
NOTE CONF
x.
And we do consider the result of applying odds req
NOTE CONF
to the rest of x.
The rest of the list, which is x is okay.
NOTE CONF
So odds rec apply to this list.
If x is odd, it's x cons odds rec apply
NOTE CONF
to the rest of the list.
Okay, otherwise we don't include x, so we throw x
NOTE CONF
away and we just include the rest of the odd
numbers and x's okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's how you write a kind of case analysis
in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
And the formatting is not required, but it makes it
easy to read.
NOTE CONF
I strongly encourage you to use this style of formatting
where you've got like vertically aligned cases and vertically aligned
NOTE CONF
are equal signs.
And in fact, Haskell has some rules about, um, alignment.
NOTE CONF
Um, and they're kind of complicated to explain.
But if you format things the way that I do
NOTE CONF
in my lectures, everything will be okay.
And if you don't, you might end up with a
NOTE CONF
confusing error message.
So here.
NOTE CONF
Are there any performance advantages to using.
To comprehension.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, that was about performance.
I didn't quite get it all.
NOTE CONF
You said is there a difference in performance?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is no no difference in performance.
Or at least none that you will notice.
NOTE CONF
Um, everything.
So in this course, I'm kind of encouraging you not
NOTE CONF
to worry too much about efficiency.
Okay, one one reason is that, um, the important thing
NOTE CONF
is getting it right.
And whether, you know, computing the wrong answer really fast
NOTE CONF
is not very helpful.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, better to to to get the right answer more
slowly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, Haskell, the Haskell has an incredible amount of kind
NOTE CONF
of clever technology in the compiler that, um, recognises, uh,
common situations and produces, uh, code that runs fast.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so these two, these two cases will probably, in
Haskell, produce exactly the same, uh, uh, you know, down
NOTE CONF
underneath the way that things are computed will probably produce
the same sequence of computation steps in the end.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So Haskell is clever that way.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Anything else?
NOTE CONF
I'm kind of coming close to my, uh, the end
of my lecture here.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll just say you can do you can do
it again, a step by step.
NOTE CONF
Uh, uh, run through this to see that it's does
what you expect.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can check it with quick check that it gets
NOTE CONF
the right answer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I mean, maybe I should go back a second to
this definition.
NOTE CONF
Um, I said, I mean, is it clear what the
format of this is?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can have more than you can have more than
NOTE CONF
two cases.
Oh, I forgot to say otherwise.
NOTE CONF
What otherwise was okay, otherwise is just, uh, an abbreviation
for, um, the value.
NOTE CONF
True.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The thing after the vertical bar has to be, uh,
an expression which evaluates to true or false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If it evaluates to true, then that's the case that
NOTE CONF
we take.
If it evaluates to false, then we go on to
NOTE CONF
the next case.
Always one after the other, okay?
NOTE CONF
And otherwise will always be like the final case.
And it just means true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It will catch all of the cases that aren't caught
NOTE CONF
by the earlier ones.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Otherwise sounds better than true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, for a case set of cases.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's the one that will be true if none
of the other ones are true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, in my lecture, the slides, I'll just quickly show
NOTE CONF
you this here is a definition which can't be.
This is a function which can't be defined using comprehension.
NOTE CONF
The sum of a list of integers.
Does anybody know why it can't be defined using comprehension?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Comprehension.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
Comprehension can only produce lists say takes a list and
produces a list.
NOTE CONF
This one produces an integer.
Okay, so just because of the types it can't be
NOTE CONF
done using comprehension.
But it can be done using using recursion.
NOTE CONF
And you know the sum of an empty list is
zero.
NOTE CONF
And the sum of x cons x is the first
value in the list x plus the sum of the
NOTE CONF
rest of the values in the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And here's a computation for some applied to the list.
Uh, 123.
NOTE CONF
The answer is six.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And product.
Uh, similarly, uh, it happens that the product of the
NOTE CONF
list one, two, three is also six.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, interestingly here the so product it does multiplication instead
of addition.
NOTE CONF
Interestingly the um, uh, this is the base case here,
so-called base case.
NOTE CONF
I always I forgot to use this terminology.
Base case is like the empty list case.
NOTE CONF
The the result is one because one is the identity
value for for multiplication.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I won't finish this.
NOTE CONF
But basically this is just showing how to put it
all together.
NOTE CONF
We had before the the comprehension version of the sum
of the squares of the odd numbers in the list.
NOTE CONF
And here is the recursion version.
It's basically putting together everything that I had in the
NOTE CONF
previous three definitions into one into one definition.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And you can you can look this up in the
slides which are in the on the course learn page.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
I'm out of time.
NOTE CONF
Uh, thanks for your attention.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we came a bit later about that, but I
was just wondering, what's, uh.
NOTE CONF
Why do we use recursion is just a first.
Instead of what?
NOTE CONF
What?
Instead of the.
NOTE CONF
Comprehension?
Because sometimes you can't write functions using recursion.
NOTE CONF
That's the reason.
That's one reason, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I can't make.
My 9 a.m. tutorial because the classes are.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, but I'm going to do 1031 and Fergus emailed
you to tell you that.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I requested them to change it, but they
haven't changed it yet.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to be going to 1031.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Go.
NOTE CONF
I mean, as long as the tutors know what you're
doing and as long as you've requested it.
NOTE CONF
I don't know.
It's on.
NOTE CONF
It's on Piazza.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there's this list of all the tutorials.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so they have to know, and you need to
apply using that form to switch.
NOTE CONF
And I actually don't need to know because I can't
do anything about it.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Huh.
NOTE CONF
Why can't you do patterns with more than more than
like XS and XS?
NOTE CONF
Why can't you do, for example, X y cons exist.
You can.
NOTE CONF
Yes you can.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So for example, if you wanted to write a program
that would, um, uh, throw away every second element of
NOTE CONF
a list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So keeping only the first element, the third element, the
fifth element.
NOTE CONF
And so far that would be naturally written with a
pattern like what you just said.
NOTE CONF
And then the function again.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, would be like um, f of empty list is
equal to the empty list.
NOTE CONF
F of the list containing just one thing would be,
uh, I guess the list containing that one thing and
NOTE CONF
list with a cons b cons, uh, something else I
don't know.
NOTE CONF
Uh, l is equal to a cons f of l.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Something related to the tutorial, like questions.
To tutorial two or tutorial one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, um, quick questions or.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Are we supposed to return the values according to the
NOTE CONF
index number or according to the values in the list?
Is it necessary that they are going the values?
NOTE CONF
The values, not the indices.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this will be in like a certain order and.
Within the range given by the.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I sorry I mean I mean the values.
So between you know between 5 and 10, uh, it's.
NOTE CONF
Always going to be in ascending order or descending order
or something.
NOTE CONF
Like that.
No, no, no.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is, uh, so what I mean, you know,
like, it's so this happens to be in ascending order,
NOTE CONF
but it doesn't have to be, obviously.
And I don't mean according to the indices, I mean
NOTE CONF
according to the values.
So if you have a bunch of numbers, then all
NOTE CONF
of the ones that are between 5 and 10 as
values should be in the result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
How do you avoid like.
How do.
NOTE CONF
You.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
My name collision.
Like um for example you can define a function f.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You take two parameters heads and tails.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Then inside that function you can use the head and
NOTE CONF
tail function is, uh, like.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You, um, okay.
So, uh.
NOTE CONF
One, one thing is you can, you can just avoid
that by being careful, okay?
NOTE CONF
But if you do it, you know.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
As you say, as you say, you can't use you
head, head, head within this, uh, this expression here means
NOTE CONF
that.
And tail means that.
NOTE CONF
And you can't use them as functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It creates a new.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
It's called a scope.
NOTE CONF
This is called the scope.